added introduction Poisson vignette based on the FIFA2018 example (#74)
alexpghayes/distributions3: vignettes/poisson.Rmd

certainly remain, we should also consider that there are stronger and weaker
teams in the tournament.

## Poisson regression and probabilistic forecasting

To account for different expected performances from the teams in the 2018 FIFA World Cup,
the `FIFA2018` data provides an estimated `logability` for each team. These
have been estimated by @Zeileis+Leitner+Hornik:2018 prior to the start of the
tournament (2018-05-20) based on quoted odds from 26 online bookmakers using
the bookmaker consensus model of @Leitner+Zeileis+Hornik:2010. The `difference` in
`logability` between a team and its opponent is a useful predictor for the
number of `goals` scored.

Consequently, we fit a generalized linear model (GLM) to the data that links
the expected number of goals per team/match $\lambda_i$ to the linear predictor
$x_i^\top \beta$ with regressor vector $x_i^\top = (1, \mathtt{difference}_i)$
and corresponding coefficient vector $\beta$ using a log-link:
$\log(\lambda_i) = x_i^\top \beta$. The maximum likelihood estimator $\hat \beta$
with corresponding inference, predictions, residuals, etc. can be obtained in R
using the `glm()` function with `family = poisson`:

```{r}

> m <- glm(goals ~ difference, data = FIFA2018, family = poisson)

Reviewer: Perhaps mention we need `glm` and that `glm` comes from `stats`, not `distributions3`?

Author: I just point out that it is from "base R" which is hopefully sufficiently clear without creating confusion about what the `stats` package actually is.

summary(m)
```

> Both parameters have intuitive interpretations. First, the intercept

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both parameters can be interpreted. First, the intercept
```

corresponds to the expected log-goals per team in a match of two equally strong teams,
i.e., with zero difference in log-abilities. The corresponding prediction for the
number of goals can either be obtained manually from the extracted `coef()`
or equivalently using the `predict()` function:

```{r}

> lambda_zero <- exp(coef(m)[1])

Reviewer: Might be worthwhile explaining why the `exp()` call is here

Author: Good point, expanded now.

lambda_zero

> predict(m, newdata = data.frame(difference = 0), type = "response")

Reviewer: Similarly, explaining why we need `type = "response"` might be useful to some students.

Author: You are right, the default `type` is really an unfortunate choice in `predict.glm`.

```

As above, we can also set up a `Poisson()` distribution object and obtain the

> associated expected probability distribution for zero to six goals:

Reviewer: Clarify that this is conditional on having zero difference in `logability`? I'm a little worried that we might be going back and forth between marginal and conditional distributions in a confusing way.

Author: I've stated this more clearly now, I hope.

```{r}
p_zero <- Poisson(lambda = lambda_zero)
pdf(p_zero, 0:6)
```

Second, the slope of $`r round(coef(m)[2], digits = 3)`$ can be interpreted
as an ability elasticity of the number of goals scored. This is because the
difference of the log-abilities can also be understood as the log of the ability
ratio. Thus, when the ability ratio increases by $1$ percent, the expected
number of goals increases approximately by $`r round(coef(m)[2], digits = 3)`$
percent.

This yields a different predicted Poisson distribution for each team/match

> in the tournament. We can easily set up the vector of all $128$ `Poisson()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the tournament. We can set up the vector of all $128$ `Poisson()`
```

Author: I incorporated your suggestion before I realized that I could have just hit the "Commit suggestion" button here. (Sorry, I'm still relatively new to GitHub...)

distribution objects by extracting the vector of all fitted point estimates
$(\hat \lambda_1, \dots, \hat \lambda_{128})^\top$:

```{r}
p_reg <- Poisson(lambda = fitted(m))
head(p_reg)
```

As an illustration, the following goal distributions could be expected for the
final that France won 4-2 against Croatia:

```{r}
tail(FIFA2018, 2)

> p_final <- tail(p_reg, 2)

Reviewer: Maybe a quick comment about how the vectorization works here, since that's showing up for the first time now?

Author: Yes, good point. I've mentioned this explicitly now.

p_final
pdf(p_final, 0:6)
```

> Clearly, France was expected to score more goals than Croatia

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, France was expected to score more goals than Croatia
```

Author: I've used "This shows that" now.

but both teams scored more goals than expected, albeit not unlikely many.

## Further details and extensions

Assuming independence of the number of goals scored, we can obtain
the table of possible match results (after normal time) by multiplying
the marginal probabilities (again only up to six goals). In R this be done

> easily using the `outer()` function which by default performs a multiplication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the `outer()` function which by default performs a multiplication
```

Author: Same here.

of its arguments.

```{r}

> res <- outer(pdf(p_final[1], 0:6), pdf(p_final[2], 0:6))

Reviewer: Clever, the fact that goals by each team are approximately independent is fascinating.

Author: Indeed it is. One could illustrate this by something like:

```
r <- residuals(m)
cor(r[1:64 * 2 - 1], r[1:64 * 2])
```

but I thought this was maybe too cryptic.

round(100 * res, digits = 2)
```

For example, we can see from this table that the expected probability for
France winning against Croatia 1-0 is $`r round(100 * res[2, 1], 2)`$ percent
while the probability that France loses 0-1 is only $`r round(100 * res[1, 2], 2)`$
percent.

The advantage of France can also be brought out more clearly by aggregating
the probabilities for winning (lower triangular matrix), a draw (diagonal),
or losing (upper triangular matrix). In R these can be computed as:

```{r}
sum(res[lower.tri(res)]) ## France wins
sum(diag(res))           ## draw
sum(res[upper.tri(res)]) ## France loses
```

> Note that these probabilities do not sum up to $1$ because we only considered

Reviewer: Nice clarification.

Author: Thanks :-)

up to six goals per team but more goals can actually occur with a small
probability.

Next, we update the expected frequencies table by averaging across the expectations
per team/match from the regression model.

```{r}

> expctd <- pdf(p_reg, 0:6)

Reviewer: Let's use `expected` and `observed` just for some additional clarity and to match the stylistic conventions elsewhere in the package.

Author: OK.

head(expctd)
expctd <- colMeans(expctd)
cbind("observed" = obsrvd, "expected" = expctd)
```

As before, observed and expected frequencies are reasonably close, emphasizing that

> the model has a good marginal fit for this data. To bring out the deviations graphically

Reviewer: I think the word marginal here may throw some people. Also some may confuse deviations with "standard deviations". These are pedantic comments and please feel free to ignore them.

Author: I use "discrepancies" instead of "deviations" now. But I'm not sure how to rephrase "marginal" because this is the place where we need it, I think, as we're averaging over the conditional distributions.

> we show the frequencies on a square root scale using a so-called _hanging rootogram_

Reviewer: Why would we want to show frequencies on a square root scale?

Author: To approximately stabilize the variances of the discrepancies. Otherwise the plot is dominated by the discrepancies for the large frequencies while you don't see those at the small frequencies. I thought that this went to far, though, and just included the reference to the paper that explains the idea.

\[
\begin{align*}
  \ell(\lambda; y_1, \dots, y_n) & = \sum_{i = 1}^n \log f(y_i; \lambda) \\
\end{align*}
\]

For solving the first-order condition analytically below we need the score function, i.e.,
the derivative of the log-likelihood with respect to the paramter $\lambda$. The derivative
of the sum is simply the sum of the derivatives:

\[
\begin{align*}
\ell^\prime(\lambda; y_1, \dots, y_n)
    & = \sum_{i = 1}^n \left\{ \log f(y_i; \lambda) \right\}^\prime \\
    & = \sum_{i = 1}^n \left\{ -\lambda + y_i \cdot \log(\lambda) - \log(y_i!) \right\}^\prime \\
    & = \sum_{i = 1}^n \left\{ -1 + y_i \cdot \frac{1}{\lambda} \right\} \\
    & = -n + \frac{1}{\lambda} \sum_{i = 1}^n y_i
\end{align*}
\]

The first-order condition for maximizing the log-likelihood sets its derivative to zero.
This can be solved as follows:

\[
\begin{align*}
  \ell^\prime(\lambda; y_1, \dots, y_n) & = 0 \\
  -n + \frac{1}{\lambda} \sum_{i = 1}^n y_i & = 0 \\
  n \cdot \lambda & = \sum_{i = 1}^n y_i \\
  \lambda & = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i = 1}^n y_i = \bar y
\end{align*}
\]

Thus, the maximum likelihood estimator is simply the empirical mean $\hat \lambda = \bar y.$

> Unfortunately, when the paramter $\lambda$ is not constant but depends on a linear predictor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, when the parameter $\lambda$ is not constant but depends on a linear predictor
```

Author: Fixed (in two places actually).
